[Applause]
[Music]
david's wife um
and this is an event in corner
in the owner of the first anniversary of
david graber's passing
and in the spirit of his rejection of
academic arrogance and our
urgent need to get
out of the crisis we are in we set up
the art project
fight club welcome to the first one of
the series
today we are talking about what is that
the next one will be about the nature of
money
david was probably the most famous
anthropologist of our times and the
best-selling offer even still he had a
fold in his computer called nightmare
in which he dumped all bills
bureaucratic papers invoices
and papers of his academic achievements
he regards the idea of isolated
individual as a myth
what interested david much more was a
dialogue he believed that it is only in
dialogue in the clash of opinions
where answers are formed and how human
consciousness is born
we humans according to david are the
product of our social relationship
that's why it was so important for him
to be involved in a situation in which
people think and act collectively
and david greber foundation will follow
the same path so we have several
projects lined up from collective
edition of his archive to publishing the
anthology of the fight club starting
from the first debate between david
greber and peter thiel
as fight club official cheerleader i
urge our fighters to be emotional
provocative and bold because the
questions that
we'll discuss concern us all
if enough of us will change the way we
think about what deb mean
then the social design of our society
will change our change along with this
so this is just that
as david described what a revolution is
a change of common sense
and the collective imagination
and david
argued that the main achievement of the
paris commune despite a defeat had been
the transformation of the common sense
about how we live together
so most of what we consider ordinary in
our cities public transportation street
lights public schools the eight hours
work days and even
the not yet achieved equal pay for women
and men originated in the paris commune
and it was then considered to be a
social madness
so the same can be said said about
occupy those 10th anniversary we
celebrate it now just as we celebrate
david's life occupy didn't take over any
territory it didn't have leaders and
governments but it did change the public
discourse
it's become important to talk about
equality poverty and that
so after after occupy will look at the
world differently
speaking on that the position of our
fighters today are radically different
we want to i want to express my immense
gratitude to thomas piquety who replied
to my email although we didn't know each
other and agreed to participate in this
debate i also want to thank michael
hudson who came up with them many of the
ideas that david graber built upon in
his book five thousand years of that
and i really hope that this debate can
radically change the way we think about
the world
and what else could be more exciting so
i
passed to lean who
uh thank you for
agree to moderate this discussion
well it's my great pleasure and it's
wonderful to welcome everyone from all
over the world uh we share some
commonalities in our human experience
and one of them is that we tend to come
into the world most of us
uh sort of under capitalized for the
experience uh so in a sense
most of us are united in debt and that's
why it's especially exciting to have
two such brilliant thinkers help us
unpack this
difficult subject from the suitcase
where we like to push it way into the
back of the closet
today i'm very delighted to welcome my
friend michael hudson
he is a distinguished professor of
economics at the university of missouri
kansas city
he's also a researcher at the levy
institute at bard he's a former wall
street analyst and a frequent commenter
on economic matters and historical
matters
he's written extensively about debt and
as you just heard from nika his work was
a great inspiration for david graber
he can also tell you more about the
ancient sumerians than you ever dreamed
of knowing so hopefully we get to hear a
little bit about that today
welcome professor hudson and welcome
also to tomati
he is the um
professor at the e h
e s s and the paris school of economics
and he's also the co-director of the
world inequality lab you know him for
going viral
with his books telling us why most of us
don't have any money
of course there was his smash hit
capitalism in the 21st century and more
recently
which you must get if you haven't read
it capitalism and ideology uh welcome to
you professor pikati
and we'll start out having each of you
tell us uh your thoughts about debt your
position on the topic and you'll have
about five minutes each and uh i think
we'll start with you professor hudson
i thought we're going to let tom go
first otherwise it's going to be fine
that's all the things i agree with that
he wrote and let him say what
that's fine with me thomas would you
like to go first
uh yeah whatever is it's fine i mean so
okay let me say a few words first let me
you know thank you for organizing this
and and you know i was very
you know when i received nika's email uh
you know i felt you know where you know
i felt very
emotional because you know i remember
very well the discussion we had with
david
gruber back in 2013 in paris which was
right after my book capital in the 21st
century was first published in french it
was not yet available in english for
david has not read it but i had read
this book
and that
the first ten thousand years and and um
and and this was
you know this was for me this was really
a very um
you know powerful reading and this made
me think a lot maybe this was not so
visible in capital in the 21st century
because i had written it actually before
i i could read david's book but but you
know to me this was this was really a
major and this is a major contribution
so what about that let me simply say
that
you know there will be in the future
there will be again other uh that
consolation massive debt consolation so
you know there are long cycles about
that which which of course david
talks about when we go back to ancient
history or to sumerian times and as as
michael
has has been um has been working on and
so you have this long-run cycle but you
also have you know a short more
short-run history of of that consolation
a more or medium run history if you want
and i think it's very important to to
remember in particular that you know
after uh you know there are
two two modern episodes which i find
particularly striking in terms of
getting
that back to zero or at least you know
counseling a big part of that the french
revolution of course is a very important
example so you know this was a
time when the basically the political
system did not manage to make pay those
who should have paid for the public
spending which was the nobility so there
was a
fight flight toward that because the
people who should have paid the tax were
managed on how to escape and the
solution was the french revolution
and the fiscal privileges of the
aristocracy the conservation of that
through particular inflation partly
through taxation
and that's sort of one modern episode
the other modern episode which i want to
to refer to is of course
after world war ii uh you know after you
know in 1945 1950
most rich economies
had public debt which were enormous you
know even even
bigger than than
than today and they made the choices
you know the political choice through
you know very conflictual social
movement political fights in the end the
church was made collectively
not to replace his debt so this happens
in various ways you know inflation in
some cases but but some countries like
germany in particular
which is viewed today as very
conservative in terms of economic
doctrine and ideology and which in many
ways is very conservative we'll see
after the election in a few days but
you know it's still
going to be quite conservative probably
in any case but in fact after world war
ii
developed applied the solution uh to to
get rid of the debt of the past through
a
monetary reform and through progressive
taxation of very high wealth holders in
order to in effect compensate the lower
wealth orders for the
uh for the monetary reform and the the
loss of links that was implied by
military reform so that in the end i
mean this is not the certainly not a
perfect system but as compared to all
other ways of getting rid of past debt
you know this was
certainly one of the
one of the most equitable or at least
least or the least unequitable way to to
address the problem
and you know i think we will have
we will have other episodes like this in
the future so nobody knows the form it
will takes you know the kind of
political mobilization
you know occupier was
was an important episode there will be
other you know there are other
you know social movement tax revolt you
know if you think of the yellow vest
movement in france a couple of years ago
which was a major tax level to get rid
of a very
what i think was a very uh
an equal
project to raise the carbon taxes
basically on the poorest group in
society um
and and there will be you know to
address climate uh challenges but also
you know all sorts of social and
developmental
challenges
we will we you know societies will have
to to to to find ways
of of getting rid of their debt right
now we have this illusion that you know
we can just take it on the central bank
offer and and forget about it but
you know i think it will be more
conflictual and more uh
less peaceful than this because it's
always a matter in the end of redefining
a power relation between different
social groups so it cannot be completely
peaceful it involves a
conflicting social interest it involves
different
groups of people with different agenda
and
you know in many ways we have we are in
a situation
which is not
i think completely different from the
one at the time of the french revolution
which is that the you know those who
those who should pay
have somehow managed to design a legal
system and a political system so that
they can escape
taxation and
and at the same time middle class and
lower class people are
you know fed up of paying the bill for
them and so and so the solution is more
and more debt but you know at some point
there will have to be something else
will have to happen and i think it will
be
roughly the same it will have to be
roughly the same solution as it was
you know 200 years ago which is the end
of
of fiscal privileges of
a small group in the population that has
that has managed to escape
taxation for for
for too long so that's okay that's a
sort of initial
initial perspective and
and that but you know of course i'd be
very
interested to hear michael and continue
the discussion
thank
you michael it's uh floor is yours
okay well i certainly appreciated uh the
the book that you published
on the uh accumulation of uh wealth and
how it's concentrated in the hands of
the uh one percent i think everybody
knew intuitively that this was the case
but uh economists being who they are
they don't really accept something until
it's all there in statistics and uh you
you did uh just a wonderful job in tying
together uh all of these statistics and
uh showing how the degree to which
wealth is uh the one percent of
concentrated wealth in every country and
you also made i think the most important
point where you said what's caused this
and you came up with the broad answer
that i agree with you said that
financial returns exceed the overall
rate of growth and the financial returns
exceed the overall rate of growth of
course you're going to have the rich
getting uh richer uh and richer
and i think the reason uh
[Music]
where we uh
have a different approach is how do you
explain all of this well uh when your
book came out a number of writers said
well this is uh uh the marks of the uh
uh 20th century and uh
uh
you showed that there was an abrupt
turning point uh in 1980 and uh
everything had been changed there and i
think the one percent looked at your
statistics as a success story they said
yep we're really uh doing better than
everybody else and as uh the head of
goldman sachs said that's because we're
so uh productive uh but i think the
reason your book was praised so much uh
in the west is you didn't come up with a
threatening political solution uh and uh
when they said this was the mark book is
the marks for modern time that meant
don't read marx read this book and i
suspect that after you put all of this
enormous good work into the uh
statistics that you did on wealth and
income i think the publisher probably
said well what are what are your
solutions well you just came up with uh
uh the solution that you uh said in the
book and that's to tax income and wealth
this is not a threatening solution
because there's no way that you're going
to tax wealth as long as you have
offshore banking centers to conceal
wealth as long as uh you have what the
oil industry put in place 100 years ago
the flags of convenience pretending to
make their uh income abroad the fact is
uh the one percent don't really make
much income they're ideal if you're a
billionaire you want to do what uh half
of american corporations do you don't
make a penny of taxable income uh
that that's uh the whole problem so i
want to go into what uh your book was
not about uh i'm not criticizing you for
not writing a different book but
it's what i write about and that is why
what is it that has created this uh uh
disparity and why is it widened so much
since 1980
well the most obvious reason is uh
interest rates
reached a peak of 20
in uh 1980 and they've gone down ever
since well
in the late 1970s uh my old boss's boss
at chase manhattan paul volcker said
let's raise interest rates to very high
because the 99
are getting too much income their wages
are going up let's uh raise interest to
slow the economy and that will prevent
wages from going up and he did and that
was a large uh reason why carter lost
the election to ronald reagan interest
rates then went down from 20
to almost 0
today the result was the largest bond
market boom in history bonds went way up
in price the economy was flooded with
bank credit and most of this credit uh
apart from going into the bond market
went into real estate and there is a
symbiosis between finance and real
estate and also between finance and raw
materials and also like oil and gas and
minerals
extraction natural resource rent land
rent and also monopoly rent and most of
the monopoly rent has come from the
privatization that you had from ronald
reagan margaret thatcher and the whole
neoliberalism uh
if you look at how did this one percent
get most of its wealth well if you look
at the forbes list of the billionaires
in almost every country they got wealth
in the old-fashioned way from taking it
from the public domain in other words
privatization you have the largest
privatization and transfer of wealth
from the public sector to uh the private
sector and specifically to the financial
sector uh in in history uh sell-offs and
all of a sudden instead of
infrastructure uh public health uh other
basic needs being provided at subsidized
rates to the population you have uh
privatized uh owners uh financed by the
banks raising the rates to
whatever rate they can get without any
market firing power uh in the united
states
uh the uh government is not even allowed
to bargain with the pharmaceutical
companies for uh the drug prices so
there's been a huge monopolization a
huge privatization uh a huge flooding of
the economy with credit and one person's
credit is somebody else's uh debt so
you you've described the one percent's
wealth in the form of uh savings but uh
i focus on the other side of the balance
sheet this one percent finds its
counterpart in the debts of the 99
so the one percent has got wealthy by
indebting the 99
uh for housing that is soared in price
uh just in the last year in the united
states uh for medical care for uh
utilities for education uh the economy
is being forced increasingly into debt
and how how can one uh solve this uh
taxation will not be enough the only way
that you can uh actually reverse this uh
concentration of wealth is to begin
wiping out uh the debt if you leave the
debt in place uh of the 99
uh then uh you're going to
leave the 1
savings all in place uh and these
savings are largely tax exempt uh so
basically i think you you uh left out
the government's role in this wealth
creation of the one percent
your
finance has indeed grown faster than
economy finances absorbed real estate
into the finance insurance and real
estate sector the fire sector finances
absorb the oil industry the mining
industry and it's absorbed most of the
government so the financial wealth has
spilled over to become
essentially the economy's central
planner it's not planned in washington
or
paris or london it's planned in wall
street the city of london and the paris
force
the economy is being managed financially
and the object of financial management
isn't really to make money it's capital
gains uh and again as your statistics
point out capital gains are really what
explains the increase in wealth you
don't get rich by saving the income
uh rent is for paying interest income is
for paying interest you get rich off the
government basically subsidizing an
enormous increase in the value of stocks
the value of bonds by the central banks
which have been privatized and
the reason that this is occurring is
that uh the largest public utility of
all money creation and banking is left
in private hands and private banking in
the west is very different from what
government banking is and say china
government banking would create credit
for public uses for what the economy
needs to grow
in the united states and throughout the
west banks create credit to slow the
economy from growing they make loans
only not to create new means of
production new factories
they create they make loans against
property already in place mainly real
estate already in place eighty percent
of bank loans in america and europe are
for real estate uh they make loans for
corporate takeovers uh they make loans
uh to buy uh other companies they don't
make loans to build new factories which
is what uh a government uh
creation money creation in say china
china would do so uh as long as you
leave banking and credit in private
hands you're going to have banks
creating their product debt and the more
debt they create the more debt service
that the borrowers the 99
have to pay the banks
in order to obtain a house or an
education or medical care or just to
break even and the more money they pay
to the financial sector the less they
have to pay for goods and services so as
the economy polarizes between the 1
and the 99
the economy as a whole shrinks because
more and more of its income is spent not
on production uh and consumption it's
spent just on debt service so uh my
solution is uh you have to restore
banking and credit in to public hands to
prevent the kind of lending that makes
asset price inflation uh secondly uh you
talked about taxing some taxes are more
important than others uh i don't think
that as long as there are uh as long as
the banks and the financial sector write
the tax codes as long as the government
lawmakers are basically employees of the
financial sector who finances their
political campaigns uh you're not going
to be able to tax them or to close down
the fake uh
transfer pricing the corporations use to
pretend not to make money so uh you have
to tax
the
source of
the money that pays interest to the
banks
itself and that source is mainly
economic rent it's land rent if you
would have a tax on
the increase in land values if you'd
have a land tax which is what the whole
19th century was about adam smith john
stewart mill uh marks uh then if
you would not have this uh increased
rent being paid to the financial sector
to be monopolized by the one percent uh
so you you'd have to change the the way
in which the tax code is based away from
just overall income and wealth which is
really not very practical in today's
political situation you'd have to have a
land tax and a natural resource tax and
to get rid of monopoly rent you have to
return basic key uh infrastructure to
the public domain where it was before
1980 so that uh basic needs can be
supplied at low prices not creating
monopoly for uh the one percent uh and i
guess i'm saying you have to realize
that finance has used as well to take
over the economy and this has to be
reversed uh because uh once you have uh
wealth taking the form of uh claims uh
loans and claims on other people's debt
will count you up compound interest any
rate of interest is a doubling time and
compound interest is always going to
grow faster than the economy's real
growth and the only way to prevent this
isn't simply to lower the interest rate
which you've done today to well 0.1
percent
the only solution is to wipe out the
overall debts that are stopping economic
growth and these debts are the savings
of the one percent the good thing about
cancelling debts is you cancel the
savings of the one percent and as long
as you leave these savings in place
there's not going to be a solution
thank you so much michael and thomas
feel free to respond to this idea of uh
cancelling debt
yeah you know i i i don't feel like we
have any major uh disagreement about you
know everything you just say michael uh
let me say also regarding you know my my
book capital in the 21st century uh you
know it's a book that has lots of
limitations and and you know i have on
many issues you know i've tried to to to
to make progress since then so this was
written 10 years ago i wrote capital an
ideology much more recently which i
think addresses some of the shortcomings
but this is and still this book has also
a lot of limitations so you know i'm
trying to make progress all the time and
i certainly don't pretend that all the
answers are in
[Music]
you know one book and
that being said i think you know many
many things that you've mentioned you
know again i fully agree with that i as
i said you know the the consolation of
that is is um is very important because
as as you very well say the the part of
the increase in private wealth at the
top was really made
through you know privatization of public
assets increased in public debt you know
there's one one statistic which i which
i stress a lot which is that if you look
at the net wealth of the public sector
you know the net wealth of the
government so government assets minus
government debt it used to be you know
in the 1970s
the net public wealth was you know
between 20 30 percent of total national
wealth so you know net private wealth
was bigger you know was like 70 or 80
percent but still net public wealth was
20 30 percent in germany in the u.s in
france in britain uh in japan so that
was you know substantial part of
everything there was to own
in terms of of marketable assets in
society belong to the public domain you
know say around one quarter between one
quarter and one third today
so you know three four decades later
it is close to zero or actually negative
in in in the u.s or in in the uk in the
sense that the public debt is bigger
than the public assets because many
public assets were privatized and uh
and public debt increased and you know
in effect there was a transfer
of public wealth
to to private well soldiers and that's
uh you know that's a very important
evolution which you see the most extreme
case of course will be russia and post
communist country where you know you
just transfer all the public wealth and
you make oligarchs out of nothing but in
fact we've all
you know all countries have had these
kind of trajectories over the recent
decades so that's really an important
part of the story that i've been
trying to tell so you know again i don't
think we have any disagreement on this
at an even broader level you know it's
it's all about power and and political
institutions so as you said you know as
long as
the system of
of political finance and you know
parties and campaigns and media and
think tank you know are largely
controlled by by large wealth holders
you know our collective ability to
change the distribution of wealth and
the the
you know through through taxation or
that consolation and or what you know
whatever the method
is going to be limited so it will take
major
political fight and in some cases you
know changing the political rules of the
game and the political institution to to
to changes and and
you know the good news is that this has
always been like this or this has always
and and still sometimes you know it has
worked in the in the past but it has
worked you know i mentioned the french
revolution you know of course that's a
huge popular mobilization uh also in the
20th century i mentioned after world war
ii after world war one well let's be
clear it's only because there was a very
powerful
you know labor movement a socialist
movement and communist counter model in
the east which in the end put pressure
uh on the on the
uh on you know on the in effect and the
elite governing elite in the in in in
the west so that they
they had to accept a number of decisions
you know which which were limited in
their scope but still which transform
the economic and social system in in a
very substantial way as compared to the
pre-world war one and 19th century
economic system but it's only through
this enormous political mobilization and
collective organization and you know it
will be the same in in the past so just
one last point you know you mentioned
the case of
china
and you know i think the chinese counter
model can can
contribute maybe in the future also to
sort of put pressure on the west to to
to change our system also at this stage
you know we are not
you know the the big difference of
course with the soviet counter model is
that the soviet control model you know
you had a
sort of a narrative
and and a proximity between socialist
and communist party and the labor
movement so that
in in effect the the elite in the west
felt threatened by the by the by this
counter model and this contributed to
reinforce
to some extent until a certain point of
the labor movement in the in the in the
west well until the final fall of the
soviet union which of course reinforced
a lot
uh you know
capitalist ideology and and and
everything we've seen since then
the chinese model you know you mentioned
the fact that the banking system is is
working a bit more to the service of the
real economy and infrastructure and
investments and then the banking system
in the west but by and large you know
the chinese
model
you know looks more and more like a sort
of perfect digital dictatorship and you
know nobody really wants to
to to copy this and you know apart from
other government elites you know would
like to to to to you know to keep quiet
their population and their
grassroots movement as efficiently as
the beijing regime is doing but apart
from you know no no nobody in the world
you know no
no collective movement in the world
wants to wants to look like this so this
also limits the
the
sort of the pressure that this contour
model can can put on
on on
on
on the on the west but you know at the
end of the day i think this can be one
of the fourths which still can induce
for instance you know when we talk about
the taxation of multinational in 2021
which you know what has been decided by
rich countries you know it's very
limited you know they claim they have
solved the problem of
multinational taxation but it's it's a
bit ridiculous how little they have done
the minimum tax rate of 15 percent is
ridiculously small
and also it's only sort of sharing sort
of rich countries are sharing between
themselves you know the
tax base that is currently in tax haven
but countries in the south in the global
source basically don't get anything and
i think that's a that's an issue that's
something an area in which
the the pressure of the chinese counter
model in the future maybe will
contribute to induce
rich countries to to
to to to to to have a
bit more
you know
inclusive attitude towards the the south
also well if they don't do it i mean you
know if they don't do it in effect china
will will finance the investment and the
infrastructure investment that is needed
in africa and south asia and that's
that's you know this is at some point
you know fully western countries will
realize that they have to change
something otherwise they will just lose
any
any influence and any capacity to
influence
the world yeah
okay so this is getting us very far from
the initial discussion but
i hope this is still more or less
relevant
michael feel free to respond
well it would not surprise me if we end
up in agreement uh with what to do
and i realized that uh uh you wrote your
book about your topic and i wrote my
book about what to do about it i just
want to uh point out where i think we do
have i have a disagreement uh my point
is that compound interest is always
going to grow faster than the economy's
uh real ability to grow so in the end
debts can't be paid right now you see a
lot of third world debts that uh if the
third world better countries have to pay
uh their foreign debts uh under as the
world
economy slows down they're going to be
subject to austerity to the world banks
and uh the imf's uh austerity programs
and they're going to be kept in poverty
uh is it really right that they should
be kept in poverty just to enrich the
bondholders of the one percent the one
percent will say yes that's why we're
the one percent so that we can
impoverish other people that's our
liberty our liberty is the right to
impoverish other people and reduce them
to dependency uh that will happen if you
do not write down the debts uh it's
already happening in the united states
to the student debt uh crisis where
students uh have to pay so much money uh
as they fall behind on their student
debts that they can't afford to take out
mortgages to buy homes uh and you're
having the home ownership rates plunge
in the united states that's the result
of leaving the debts in place uh the
mortgage steps uh uh uh are are causing
shrinkage so there is no way to get out
of this economic polarization without uh
a debt write down and that's something
that is too radical and uh uh when we
talked about when i was referring to
what china's doing i'm referring to what
it's doing today and tomorrow about uh
the uh real estate company evergreen uh
china has a choice is it going to leave
evergreen's real estate debts in place
and every grand uh as a real estate
company is two to three percent of the
entire chinese economy if it pays the
foreign creditors and the domestic one
percent of china it's going to
impoverish the uh the employees of
evergrand it's going to make housing
prices more and more expensive in china
china has had a debt finance housing
boom uh if you leave the debts in place
then uh you're you're going to
impoverish china and obviously china is
going to say i'm we're not going to put
the creditors first we're not going to
do what the west does and say the
sanctity of debt service debts are uh
that you owe are sacred uh it's worth
sacrificing the economy it's worth
plunging the economy into poverty just
to preserve the wealth of the one
percent i think china's uh is going to
make the opposite decision and say
we're not going to commit political
suicide we're going to operate for it's
a socialist economy and when it comes to
debt and credit thank god we have our
banking in the public domain and since
the public domain the people's bank of
china is the creditor they can afford to
write down the debt without having any
political backlash because it's
cancelling debt zone to itself uh which
is a great advantage uh and it's also uh
as for the private bondholders uh it's
going to say well sorry bondholders you
made loans to a company that was way
over leveraged uh already uh the
american bond rating companies have
reduced their bond rating to chunk so
you knew what you were buying if you
continued to hold bonds that uh fitch
and other bond raiders moody's all say
are chunked
and you lose your money well
you took the risk you got a high rate of
interest now you're paying the price
that's how markets work uh and uh that
really uh is the argument and i think uh
you have to uh obviously what i'm
suggesting is a radical step just as
you're suggesting of taxing wealth would
require the radical step of closing down
offshore banking centers of simply
negating uh if uh
banks would simply
erase all of the deposits they have from
the offshore banking centers from the
cayman islands from from panama from uh
from liberia to all the places that
began by to be set up by the mining
companies the oil companies and then
were set up beginning in the 1960s
essentially by the cia to finance the
vietnam war by making america
like england the home for criminal
capital for flight capital all this uh
all the flight capital and the
kleptocracy that you mentioned in russia
all this really
should be wiped out and if you leave
this capital if you leave this one
percent in place the economy is going to
be sacrificed and shrinking is it worth
shrinking the economy just to leave the
one percent in place and if you
challenge them that's pretty radical
that's really what i think marx would
say today
um thank you and i i wanted to just
pitch a question to you all before we
turn over uh it over to some questions
from the audience um you've both
mentioned
it's it's not the elephant in the room
it's sort of the tyrannosaurus rex in
the room i think tomorrow as you put it
those who should pay design the system
uh you both have commented on this
enormous problem that we have every time
we have good ideas ranging from just a
tiny little tax on the rich you know to
the more radical ideas that michael is
suggesting we run up against this
tyrannosaurus rex so where do you all
see
the most effective
pressure points coming from right now
um
in terms of getting anything
accomplished
on debt where where is the effective
mobilization potentially coming from or
that you see developing now
maybe let me first say you know we need
that cancellation you know we need a
regular debt consideration i i i don't
think at all this is a radical or too
radical if anything you know i think
this is not radical enough because i
think in addition to that consolation we
need also to redistribute the assets to
redistribute wealth and so when i'm
talking about taxing wealth it's also
redistributing wealth so giving wealth
to people who don't own anything so it's
not only cancelling their debt it's also
giving them positive
ownership rights in companies in housing
so so yeah we i think there's really no
no disagreement on this now
what about you know the pressure that
will come
well two two things first you know i
think the real problem is the system of
free capital flow so you know the idea
that you can um you know we have created
an international legal system where in
effect we have sacralized we have almost
sacralized right you know to to you you
accumulate wealth in a country using the
public infrastructure the education
system you know the health system of
your country and then you can push on a
button transfer your assets you know
another jurisdiction and nobody knows
where you are nobody and but but you
know there's nothing natural in this
system this was made by a set of
international treaties a particular
legal system and and
that's just not this can we so
individual countries i think you know i
have to get to get rid of that then so
in the case of europe you know you
cannot wait for unanimity to get rid of
that so individual countries have to say
okay you know i'm not against the
circulation of investment and capital
goods but it has to come with a
common taxation with common regulation
common rules you know this cannot just
be like this you know you push on a
button we don't know where you are so
this has to
to to go um so you know some proposals
that was made by bernie sanders in the
in the presidential campaign in the us
last year early last year this seems
like ages ago but this was only 18
months ago
you know when he said okay we you know
you can if you want to escape my federal
wealth tax you can go away but then you
will
have to pay a 40 exit tax you know you
will have to
keep 40 of your assets in the u.s if you
want to go ahead you know that's clearly
a big change as compared to free capital
flow and but that's the kind of change
we need to
you know we need we need to we need to
consider so how is this going to happen
well first we need to realize that you
know the free capital flows treaty
agreement which came a lot actually in
fact from europe in the 1980s but also
from washington of course but it was a
co-production if you want
with this has to go and individual
countries have to to escape that
other other source of change and
pressure you know i think climate change
is going to put a strong pressure in the
sense that
you know i think when people see more
and more
catastrophic
climatic events you know i think
attitudes toward globalization and
attitudes towards
inequality in general you know can
change very quickly because that you
know at some point i think people will
not find it funny at all to have all
these billionaires you know giving
lessons using their private jet doing
space tourism
et cetera you know at some point you
know i think nobody is going to find
this funny at all and there can be a
very quick and
fast you know complete change in
attitude for the release and you know i
think the chinese sort of counter model
with all its good and bad very bad
sometimes aspects
can also be
a factor of change
thank you uh michael would you like to
respond to that yeah i don't see a
change within the existing system i
guess that makes me radical uh
so thomas did not mention the main point
that he made in his book which was uh
his number one suggestion was tax
inherited wealth because most wealth is
inherited that's one of the things that
he's found absolutely right great idea
son simone uh the great french economist
had this idea when the very first book
he wrote around 1806
uh
it made him very unpopular and he
soon realized that that's one there was
no way of doing that uh from some simone
on to the entire 19th century of british
political and french political economy
they all agreed uh with smith and the
others you have to uh there's a landlord
attack the one percent in their day were
the landlords you have to tax away the
land rent and make that the public uh
tax base not income not taxes on
consumer goods not taxes on capital
because you want good capital investment
you want fortunes to be made in a good
way that add to the economy's
productivity you don't want them to be
made in a predatory bad way uh the whole
fight to tax economic rent and to even
recognize that most income is unearned
when you talk about the
income disparity
almost all this disparity is unearned
income it's economic rent it's not
income that's made by increasing uh
production it's not income that's made
by increasing living standards it's just
predatory rent seeking from special
privileges that the wealthy of uh gained
from government and today it's not the
landlord class anymore as it was in the
19th century if the financial class and
the raw materials class uh and uh
without uh dealing uh with this uh cl
structure i don't uh the system is going
to shrink and shrink and we've seen this
before we saw it in rome the same kind
of uh polarization and concentration of
wealth in the roman empire well the last
stage of that is feudalism so we're back
to what rosa luxemburg said the choice
is between socialism and barbarism
basically and uh
there's no other way to do it you can't
solve the problems within the existing
system because it's controlled already
by the one percent
thank you michael and uh i'd like to
toss out a couple of questions from the
audience now we have a question about
energy
one viewer asks isn't energy as much a
source of value as land
should we have progressive taxes on
energy use as well or instead of land
value tax
uh first of all land doesn't have any
value nor does uh energy have any value
we're talking about economic rent so
part of the financial sectors used part
of its uh uh income to uh subsidize
business economic schools and
universities to change the vocabulary
our vocabulary is different from the
realistic vocabulary that we have in the
19th century land doesn't really have a
value nature creates it a value is
created by
people working and creating it but
nature provides the land and the public
sectors spending on infrastructure
creates the rent of locations which
increases land prices nature provides
other oil so uh economic rent is what
we're talking about and this economic
rent uh of uh land and uh oil and
minerals and monopolies belongs in the
public domain so that you don't have to
have an income tax and
excise taxes and value-added taxes on
labor and industry you should tax the
rentiers not labor in industry that's
that's what a free market meant in the
19th century and it means inverted today
a free market is the right for the
rontiers to avoid taxes and shift the
entire tax base on to labor and industry
and they do this by twisting around and
perverting the english language to get
rid of the analytic language that you
need to even explain how some in most
income and most wealth is unearthed
uh how about you tamar do you think that
we need to clarify
how we talk about and define value
yeah well you know in the case of energy
first we have to clarify the fact that
you know there are some sources of
energy which which create a negative
value because of
of of global
climate change and climate working and
warming and you know all the negative
external effect of using some energy so
we have some to make some of the energy
uh sources just illegal you know we have
to keep some of the oil in the ground we
have to stop
looking for new oil and gas so you know
so the solution to some of the of the
energy questions we have is just to to
to make illegal you know the use of of
certain energy and to to to move to
other energy so that's part of the
answer now if we if we have done that
and we deal with with with energy that
don't have the
the
negative this much bigger negative
impact on mankind than their positive
productive impact
then
you know redistribution of wealth must
be about all forms of wealth you know
whether it's rent or energy or financial
assets or i was seeing you know we we
need to have a permanent circulation of
wealth and power so you know that's the
way i i view you know taxation of wealth
is will be a permanent you know
progressive
uh
tax net wealth which in effect will
will wipe out all the biggest uh wealth
right away you know say up to 90 percent
tax per year for you know for for
billionaires but among you know there
will still be some people who own 100
thousand dollars some people who own one
million
or two million but there will be a
permanent circulation of wealth holdings
within uh within this uh limited uh uh
wells gap that that will still exist and
this should be for all forms of wealth
you know whether it's land or housing or
whatever
whatever the origin
thank you uh we seem to have quite a
number of students in the audience today
so we have a question about student debt
and what types of resistance
students could make to
to change the social relationship of
debt that they get forced into
do you have any suggestions on
rhetorical points that students need to
engage with um in in order to gain
support for a jet jubilee on their debts
michael you wouldn't i wish there were i
don't see any because uh the uh you have
a president of the united states who
wrote the law saying that you're not
allowed to wipe out student debt as a
result of bankruptcy uh the uh basically
american philosophy is the way to
prevent uh uh a middle class from
developing is to keep them uh basically
so deeply indebted that uh they're
afraid they have to go to work they're
afraid to leave their jobs uh they can't
afford houses
the purpose of student debt is to make
them dependent under socialism on in
europe china and the old countries uh
education was free and the whole idea
was uh it's you need education in order
to grow uh under the finance
capitalist system and this is not
industrial capitalism anymore this is
financial capitalism very different you
use a basic need as a means of saying
your money or your life if you don't pay
us uh then uh
you'll you'll just have to forego your
education so the price of uh getting
access to a labor force to go so deeply
into debt that you're going to have to
work for a living and you're going to
have to work for what we pay you there's
a class war on and you got to realize
that and there's very little you can do
with students because if you don't i uh
right now i guess if you all stop paying
the debt uh
make the government for uh throw up 20
million of you in jail they can't do it
uh the only thing to do i guess would be
a strike but meanwhile they're going to
uh try to uh go after your credit rating
they're going to try to uh fight you you
you have to back politicians who are
willing to change this unfortunately
there's no party that's uh in favor of
canceling student debt or any kind of
debt in the united states because the
political parties are subsidized by the
banking in the financial sector so uh i
don't see uh i don't see a way out
tomorrow yeah well i agree with michael
that with this government and with this
president in the u.s you know it's
probably going to be difficult to get a
lot going but and and i also agree that
the entire political system in the us in
a way is so corrupt by monet and the way
campaigns are finance and you know the
way media also are financed and are
biased in the way they cover the
different possible candidates this makes
it very difficult that being said uh
again if we go back to 18 months ago you
know there were candidates in the in the
democratic primary which
you know
together you know bernie sanders a
little bit
i mean they don't put them exactly
together of course but but they had a
substantial share of the vote and on the
issue of student debt you know i think
different things could have happened
with with a different president and a
different
majority so i think it's
it's important also to to
to to to be helpful and to try to
prepare you know what will be a more
successful
coalition or a more successful political
campaign
in the future and it's important to
always
remember that as as michael was saying
the true source of economic prosperity
is not uh financial capital disabilities
uh investment in education investment in
the real economy infrastructure and you
know when
the the in the middle of the 20th
century in the 1950s 1960s when the u.s
had were in a situation of
economic dominance over the rest of the
world it was not through extreme
financial inequality except you know you
had 19 top income tax rate after
roosevelt
but you had a big educational advance
as compared to you know at that time you
had a 90 percent of a court would go to
high school in the us in 1950s 1960s
at the same time it was 20 30 percent in
germany or in france or so and this was
this educational advance which made
prosperity historically and and and we
seem to to have forgotten this uh you
know in the us following you know since
the 1980s but
so we we have to manage to put this back
on the
on this agenda but that's that's of
course that's not that's not easy
well thank you very much to uh both of
our speakers today i think you've helped
open our minds and and think about this
topic um a little more clearly
even though we're still not exactly sure
how to overcome these tremendous
forces that are working against us to
find solutions that uh really at the end
of the day i don't think anything either
one of you has said
is truly radical in the sense of history
i mean we have
as human beings we have approached and
confronted these problems before and
there have been good practical solutions
uh that both of you have offered so i
wanted to just turn the floor over to
professor steve king now and again thank
you everyone for uh participating this
conversation today
thank you for our speakers and thank you
for the audience as well i'm sorry that
there was only one hour so there's been
over 70 questions asked we'd be here for
three hours trying to answer them so it
took a couple hours to make it uh make
it worthwhile
i think i want to particularly thank
thomas for being part of this debate
because one thing michael and i've
experienced so frequently is that we
can't get anybody in the establishment
to join into discussions with us outside
the establishment and i really respect
you and honor you for for doing that and
it also shows the tremendous
contribution that david made by being
somebody who can talk to everybody and
everybody enjoys talking to david we
hope we can maintain that through the
idea of forthcoming debates and we look
forward to seeing you all though in the
future
installments in the fight club so thank
you everybody
you